--- BOOK PAGE 384 (PDF 406) ---
405 ---

Depreciation and the Trade Balance:
The Marshall–Lerner Condition
Return to the definition of net exports:
NX = X −IM ε
More concretely, if the dollar Replace X and IM by their expressions from equations (18.2) and (18.3):
depreciates vis-à-vis the yen
by 10%: c NX = X(Y*,ε)−IM(Y,ε) ε
US goods will be cheaper
in Japan, leading to a larger As the real exchange rate ε enters the right side of the equation in three places,
quantity of US exports to it is clear that the real depreciation affects the trade balance through three separate
Japan. channels:
Japanese goods will be
more expensive in the ■ Exports, X, increase. The real depreciation makes US goods relatively less expensive
United States, leading to a abroad. This leads to an increase in foreign demand for US goods—an increase in US
smaller quantity of imports
exports.
of Japanese goods to the
■ Imports, IM, decrease. The real depreciation makes foreign goods relatively more
United States and a higher
import bill for a given quantity expensive in the United States. This leads to a shift in domestic demand toward
of imports of Japanese domestic goods and to a decrease in the quantity of imports.
goods to the United States. ■ The relative price of foreign goods in terms of domestic goods, 1ε, increases. For given
IM, this increases the import bill, IM ε. The same quantity of imports now costs
more to buy (in terms of domestic goods).
For the trade balance to improve following a depreciation, exports must increase
enough and imports must decrease enough to compensate for the increase in the price
of imports. The condition under which a real depreciation leads to an increase in net
exports is known as the Marshall–Lerner condition. (It is derived formally in the
appendix, “Derivation of the Marshall–Lerner Condition,” at the end of this chapter.)
The condition is named after
It turns out that this condition is satisfied in reality. So, for the rest of this book, I shall
the two economists, Alfred
assume that a real depreciation—a decrease in ε—leads to an increase in net exports—
Marshall and Abba Lerner,
who first derived it.c an increase in NX.
The Effects of a Real Depreciation
Thus far, we have looked at the direct effects of a depreciation on the trade balance—that
is, the effects given US and foreign output. But the effects do not end there. The change in
net exports changes domestic output, which further affects net exports.
Because the effects of a real depreciation are much like those of an increase in for-
eign output, we can use Figure 18-4 to show the effects of an increase in foreign output.
Just like an increase in foreign output, a depreciation leads to an increase in net
exports (assuming, as we do, that the Marshall–Lerner condition holds) at any level
of output. Both the demand relation (ZZ in Figure 18-4(a)) and the net exports rela-
tion (NX in Figure 18-4(b)) shift up. The equilibrium moves from A to A′, and output
increases from Y to Y′. By the same argument we used previously, the trade balance
improves. The increase in imports induced by the increase in output is smaller than the
direct improvement in the trade balance induced by the depreciation.
To summarize: The depreciation leads to a shift in demand, both foreign and domes-
tic, toward domestic goods. This shift in demand leads, in turn, to both an increase in
domestic output and an improvement in the trade balance.
Although a depreciation and an increase in foreign output have the same effect
on domestic output and the trade balance, there is a subtle but important difference
between the two. A depreciation works by making foreign goods relatively more expen-
sive. But this means that, for a given income, people—who now pay more to buy foreign
384 The Open Economy Extensions


