--- PDF 149 (has 127) ---
148 ---

120 Figure 6-8
US Consumer and
100 Business Confidence,
2007–2011
80 The financial crisis led to a
sharp drop in confidence,
which bottomed in early 2009.
60
Source: Bloomberg L.P.
40
Consumer Confidence
20
0
01/2007 07/2007 01/2008 07/2008 01/2009 07/2009 01/2010 07/2010 01/2011 07/2011
Financial Policies
The most urgent measures were aimed at strengthening the financial system:
■ To prevent a run by depositors, federal deposit insurance was increased from
$100,000 to $250,000 per account. Recall, however, that much of banks’ funding
came not from deposits but from the issuance of short-term debt to investors. To
allow the banks to continue to fund themselves through wholesale funding, the
federal government offered a program guaranteeing new debt issues by banks.
■ The Federal Reserve provided funds to the financial system. We have seen that, if
investors wanted to take their funds back, the banks had to sell some of their assets, often
at fire sale prices. In many cases, this would have meant bankruptcy. To avoid this out-
come, the Fed put in place a number of liquidity facilities to make it easier for banks
and other financial intermediaries to borrow from the Fed. The Fed also increased
the set of assets that financial institutions could use as collateral when borrowing
from the Fed (collateral refers to the asset a borrower pledges when borrowing from a
lender; if the borrower defaults, the asset goes to the lender). Together, these facilities
allowed banks and financial intermediaries to pay back investors without having to
sell their assets. They also decreased the incentives of investors to ask for their funds by
decreasing the risk that banks and financial intermediaries would go bankrupt.
■ In addition, the government introduced the Troubled Asset Relief Program (TARP),
aimed at cleaning up banks. The initial goal of the $700 billion program, introduced
in October 2008, was to remove the complex assets from bank balance sheets, thus
decreasing uncertainty, reassuring investors, and making it easier to assess the health
of each bank. The Treasury, however, faced the same problems as private investors. If
the complex assets were going to be exchanged for, say, Treasury bills, at what price
should the exchange be done? Within a few weeks, it became clear that the task of
assessing the value of each of these assets was extremely hard and would take a long
time, and the initial goal was abandoned. The new goal became to increase the capital
of banks. This was done by the government’s acquiring shares and thus providing
funds to most of the largest US banks. By increasing their capital ratio, and thus
decreasing their leverage, the banks could avoid bankruptcy and, over time, return to
normal. As of the end of September 2009, total spending under the TARP was $360
billion, of which $200 billion was spent through the purchase of shares in banks.
Fiscal and monetary policies were used aggressively as well.
Chapter 6 Financial Markets II: The Extended IS-LM Model 127
)001
5
7002
yraunaJ(
ecnedfinoC
fo
xednI
Business Confidence
All banks have now bought
back their shares and
reimbursed the government.
Indeed, in the final estima-
tion, TARP actually has made
ba small profit.


--- PDF 151 (has 127) ---
150 ---

shift, so that, instead of shifting to IS′, the economy shifted to IS′′. And monetary policy It is difficult to know what
led to a shift of the LM down, from LM to LM′, so the resulting equilibrium was at point would have happened in the
absence of those policies.
A′. At that point, the zero lower bound on the nominal policy rate implied that the real
It is reasonable to think, but
policy rate could not be decreased further. The result was a decrease in output from Y to
impossible to prove, that the
Y′. The initial shock was so large that the combination of financial, fiscal, and monetary decrease in output would
measures was just not enough to avoid a large decrease in output. US GDP fell by 4% in have been much larger,
2008–2009 and recovered only slowly thereafter. b leading to a repeat of the
Great Depression.
SUMMARY
■ The nominal interest rate tells you how many dollars you ■ The higher the leverage ratio, or the more illiquid the assets,
need to repay in the future in exchange for one dollar or the more liquid the liabilities, the higher the risk of a bank
today. run or a run on financial intermediaries.
■ The real interest rate tells you how many goods you need to ■ The IS-LM model must be extended to take into account the
repay in the future in exchange for one good today. difference between the nominal and the real interest rate,
■ The real interest rate is approximately equal to the nominal and the difference between the policy rate chosen by the
rate minus expected inflation. central bank and the interest rate at which firms and people
■ The zero lower bound on the nominal interest rate implies can borrow.
that the real interest rate cannot be lower than expected ■ A shock to the financial system leads to an increase in the
inflation. interest rate at which people and firms can borrow for a
■ The interest rate on a bond depends both on the risk that the given policy rate. It leads to a decrease in output.
bond issuer will default and on the bond holder’s degree of ■ The Global Financial Crisis of the late 2000s was triggered
risk aversion. A higher probability or a higher degree of risk by a decrease in housing prices. It was amplified by the
aversion leads to a higher interest rate. financial system.
■ Financial intermediaries receive funds from investors and ■ At the time of the crisis, financial intermediaries were highly
then lend these funds to others. In choosing their lever- leveraged. Because of securitization, their assets were hard to
age ratio, financial intermediaries trade off expected profit assess and thus illiquid. Because of wholesale funding, their
against the risk of insolvency. liabilities were liquid. Runs forced financial intermediaries to
■ Because of leverage, the financial system is exposed to both reduce lending, with strong adverse effects on output.
in solvency and illiquidity risks. Both may lead financial ■ Financial, fiscal, and monetary policies were used. They
intermediaries to decrease lending. were not enough, however, to prevent a deep recession.
KEY TERMS
nominal interest rate, 110 borrowing rate, 121
real interest rate, 110 mortgage lenders, 124
risk premium, 114 subprime mortgages, or subprimes, 124
risk aversion, 114 underwater, 124
direct finance, 115 structured investment vehicles (SIVs), 124
shadow banking, 116 securitization, 125
capital ratio, 116 mortgage-backed security (MBS), 125
leverage ratio, 116 senior securities, 125
insolvency, 117 junior securities, 125
liquid, 117 collateralized debt obligations (CDOs), 125
illiquid, 117 rating agencies, 125
demand deposits, 117 toxic assets, 125
maturity mismatch, 118 wholesale funding, 126
fire sale prices, 118 liquidity facilities, 127
bank runs, 118 collateral, 127
narrow banking, 119 Troubled Asset Relief Program (TARP), 127
federal deposit insurance, 119 unconventional monetary policy, 128
liquidity provision, 119 American Recovery and Reinvestment Act, 128
policy rate, 121
Chapter 6 Financial Markets II: The Extended IS-LM Model 129


--- PDF 413 (has 391) ---
412 ---

effect, assume that US exports decrease by 5% (as a result the government). We explore the effectiveness of changes in G under
of changes in foreign output) in one year. What is the effect alternative assumptions about the propensity to import.
of a 5% drop in exports on US GDP? a. Write the equilibrium condition in the market for domestic
d. Comment on this statement. “If Europe has a major slump, goods and solve for Y.
US growth will also grind to a halt.” b. Suppose government purchases increase by one
4. A further look at Table 18-1 unit. What is the effect on output? (Assume that
Table 18-1 has four entries. Using Figure 18-5 as a guide, 0<m 1 <c 1 +d 1 <1.) Explain why.
draw the situations illustrated in each of the four entries in c. How do net exports change when government purchases
Table 18-1. Be sure you understand why the direction of change increase by one unit?
in government spending and the real exchange rate is labeled as Now consider two economies, one with m = 0.5 and the other with
1
ambiguous in each entry. m = 0.1. Each economy is characterized by (c +d )= 0.6
1 1 1
d. Suppose one of the economies is much larger than the
other. Which economy do you expect to have the larger
DIG DEEPER
value of m ? Explain.
1
5. Net exports and foreign demand e. Calculate your answers to parts b and c for each economy
a. Suppose there is an increase in foreign output. Show the by substituting the appropriate parameter values.
effect on the domestic economy (i.e., replicate Figure 18-4). f. In which economy will fiscal policy have a larger effect on
What is the effect on domestic output? On domestic net output? In which economy will fiscal policy have a larger
exports? effect on net exports?
b. If the interest rate remains constant, what will happen to
8. Policy coordination and the world economy
domestic investment? If taxes are fixed, what will happen
Consider an open economy in which the real exchange rate
to the domestic budget deficit?
is fixed and equal to one. Consumption, investment, government
c. Using equation (18.5), what must happen to private sav-
spending, and taxes are given by
ing? Explain.
d. Foreign output does not appear in equation (18.5), yet it C =10+0.8(Y−T),I =10,G =10,andT =10
evidently affects net exports. Explain how this is possible.
Imports and exports are given by
6. Eliminating a trade deficit
a. Consider an economy with a trade deficit (NX <0) and IM = 0.3Y andX = 0.3Y*
with output equal to its natural level. Suppose that, even
though output may deviate from its natural level in the where Y* denotes foreign output.
short run, it returns to its natural level in the medium a. Solve for equilibrium output in the domestic economy,
run. Assume that the natural level is unaffected by the real given Y*. What is the multiplier in this economy? If we were
exchange rate. What must happen to the real exchange to close the economy—so that exports and imports were
rate over the medium run to eliminate the trade deficit (i.e., identically equal to zero—what would the multiplier be?
to increase NX to 0)? Why would the multiplier be different in a closed economy?
b. Assume that the foreign economy is characterized by the
b. Now write down the national income identity. Assume
same equations as the domestic economy (with asterisks
again that output returns to its natural level in the medium
reversed). Use the two sets of equations to solve for the
run. If NX increases to 0, what must happen to domestic
equilibrium output of each country. (Hint: Use the equa-
demand (C+I+G) in the medium run? What govern-
ment policies are available to reduce domestic demand in tions for the foreign economy to solve for Y* as a function of
the medium run? Identify which components of domestic Y and substitute this solution for Y* in part a.) What is the
demand each of these policies affects. multiplier for each country now? Why is it different from
the open economy multiplier in part a?
7. Multipliers, openness, and fiscal policy
c. Assume that the domestic government, G, has a target level
Consider an open economy characterized by the following
of output of 125. Assuming that the foreign government
equations:
does not change G*, what is the increase in G necessary to
C = c +c (Y−T) achieve the target output in the domestic economy? Solve
0 1
for net exports and the budget deficit in each country.
I = d +d Y
0 1 d. Suppose each government has a target level of output of
IM = m Y
1 125 and that each government increases government
X = x 1 Y* spending by the same amount. What is the common
increase in G and G* necessary to achieve the target output
The parameters m and x are the propensities to import and in both countries? Solve for net exports and the budget defi-
1 1
export. Assume that the real exchange rate is fixed at a value of 1 cit in each country.
and treat foreign income, Y*, as fixed. Also assume that taxes are e. Why is fiscal coordination, such as the common increase in
fixed and that government purchases are exogenous (i.e., decided by G and G* in part d, difficult to achieve in practice?
Chapter 18 The Goods Market in an Open Economy 391


