

--- PDF Page 145 (offset 18) ---
144 ---

say 5%, then a zero nominal rate implies a real rate of −5%, which is likely to be low
enough to offset the increase in x. But if inflation is low or even negative, then the lowest
real rate the central bank can achieve may not be enough to offset the increase in x. It
may not be enough to return the economy to its equilibrium. As we shall see, two char-
acteristics of the Global Financial Crisis were indeed a large increase in x and low actual
and expected inflation, limiting how much central banks could use monetary policy to
offset the increase in x.
We now have the elements we need to understand what triggered the Global
Financial Crisis in 2008 and how it morphed into a major macroeconomic crisis. This is
the topic of the next and last section of this chapter.
6-5 THE GLOBAL FINANCIAL CRISIS:
FROM A HOUSING PROBLEM TO A
FINANCIAL CRISIS
Some forecasters consist-
ently predict impending
When housing prices started declining in the United States in 2006, most economists
catastrophes and have
forecast that this would lead to a decrease in demand and a slowdown in growth. Few taken credit for predicting the

--- PDF Page 146 (offset 19) ---
145 ---

Even if people did not finance Was the sharp price increase from 2000 to 2006 justified? In retrospect, and given
the purchase of a house by the ensuing collapse, surely not. But at the time, when prices were increasing, econo-
taking a mortgage, low inter-
mists were not so sure. Some increase in prices was clearly justified:
est rates would lead to an
increase in the price of houses. ■ The 2000s were a period of unusually low interest rates. Mortgage rates were low,
More on this when we c increasing the demand for housing and thus pushing up the price.
discuss present discounted
■ Other factors were also at work. Mortgage lenders became increasingly willing
values in Chapter 14.
to make loans to riskier borrowers. These mortgages, known as subprime mort-
gages (subprimes), had existed since the mid-1990s but became more prevalent
in the 2000s. By 2006, about 20% of all US mortgages were subprimes. Was this
necessarily bad? Again, at the time, most economists viewed it as a mostly positive
development. It allowed more poor people to buy homes, and under the assumption
Some economists were that housing prices would continue to increase, so the value of the mortgage would
worried even as hous- decrease over time relative to the price of the house, it looked safe for both lenders
ing prices were going up.

--- PDF Page 147 (offset 20) ---
146 ---

that they would get repaid, SIVs typically had a guarantee from the bank that had cre-
ated them that, if needed, the bank would provide funds to the SIV. Although the first
SIV was set up by Citigroup in 1988, SIVs rapidly grew in the 2000s. You may ask why
banks did not simply do all these things on their own balance sheet rather than create a
separate vehicle. The main reason was to be able to increase leverage. If the banks had
done these operations themselves, the operations would have appeared on their balance
sheet and would have been subject to regulatory capital requirements, forcing them to
hold enough capital to limit the risk of bankruptcy. Doing these operations through a SIV
did not require banks to put down capital. For that reason, by setting up an SIV, banks
could increase leverage and increase expected profits, and they did.
When housing prices started declining and many mortgages turned out to be bad,
the securities held by SIVs dropped in value. Questions arose about the solvency of the
SIVs, and given the banks’ guarantee to provide funds to the SIVs if needed, questions
arose about the solvency of the banks themselves. Then, two other factors, securitization
and wholesale funding, came into play.
Securitization and Illiquidity of Assets
An important financial development of the 1990s and 2000s was the growth of securi-
tization. Traditionally, the financial intermediaries that made loans or issued mortgages

--- PDF Page 148 (offset 21) ---
147 ---

Wholesale Funding and Liquidity of Liabilities
Yet another development of the 1990s and 2000s was the emergence of sources of
finance other than checkable deposits by banks. Increasingly, banks relied on borrow-
ing from other banks or other investors, in the form of short-term debt, to finance the
purchase of their assets, a process known as wholesale funding. SIVs, the financial
entities set up by banks, were entirely funded through such wholesale funding.
Wholesale funding again would seem like a good idea, giving banks more flexibility
in the amount of funds they could use to make loans or buy assets. But it too had a cost,
which became clear during the crisis. Although holders of checkable deposits were pro-
tected by deposit insurance and did not have to worry about the value of their deposits,
this was not the case for other investors. Thus, when those investors worried about the
value of the assets held by the banks or SIVs, they asked for their funds back. Banks and
SIVs had liquid liabilities, much more liquid than their assets.
The combination of high leverage, illiquid assets, and liquid liabilities led to a major
financial crisis. As housing prices declined and some mortgages went bad, high leverage
implied a sharp decline in the capital of banks and SIVs. This forced them to sell some of
their assets. Because these assets were often hard to value, the banks had to sell them at fire
sale prices. This, in turn, decreased the value of similar assets remaining on their balance

--- PDF Page 149 (offset 22) ---
148 ---

120 Figure 6-8
US Consumer and
100 Business Confidence,
2007–2011
80 The financial crisis led to a
sharp drop in confidence,
which bottomed in early 2009.
60
Source: Bloomberg L.P.
40
Consumer Confidence
20
0
01/2007 07/2007 01/2008 07/2008 01/2009 07/2009 01/2010 07/2010 01/2011 07/2011
Financial Policies
The most urgent measures were aimed at strengthening the financial system:
■ To prevent a run by depositors, federal deposit insurance was increased from
$100,000 to $250,000 per account. Recall, however, that much of banks’ funding

--- PDF Page 150 (offset 23) ---
149 ---

Monetary Policy
In the summer of 2007, the Fed had begun to worry about a slowdown in growth and
started decreasing the policy rate, slowly at first, faster later as evidence of the crisis
mounted. The evolution of the federal funds rate from 1990 on was shown in Figure 1 of
the Focus Box “The Liquidity Trap in Action” in Chapter 4. By December 2008, the rate
Recall that the interest rate was down to zero. But monetary policy was constrained by the zero lower bound, and
faced by borrowers is given the policy rate could not be decreased further. The Fed then turned to what has become
by r + x. You can think of known as unconventional monetary policy, buying other assets so as to directly
conventional monetary policy
affect the rate faced by borrowers. We shall explore the various dimensions of uncon-
as the choice of r, and
ventional monetary policy at more length in Chapter 23. Suffice it to say that, although
unconventional monetary
policy as measures to reduce these measures were useful, the efficacy of monetary policy was nevertheless severely
(but not eliminate) x.c constrained by the zero lower bound.
Fiscal Policy
When the size of the adverse shock became clear, the US government turned to fiscal
policy. When the Obama administration assumed office in 2009, its first priority was

--- PDF Page 151 (offset 24) ---
150 ---

shift, so that, instead of shifting to IS′, the economy shifted to IS′′. And monetary policy It is difficult to know what
led to a shift of the LM down, from LM to LM′, so the resulting equilibrium was at point would have happened in the
absence of those policies.
A′. At that point, the zero lower bound on the nominal policy rate implied that the real
It is reasonable to think, but
policy rate could not be decreased further. The result was a decrease in output from Y to
impossible to prove, that the
Y′. The initial shock was so large that the combination of financial, fiscal, and monetary decrease in output would
measures was just not enough to avoid a large decrease in output. US GDP fell by 4% in have been much larger,
2008–2009 and recovered only slowly thereafter. b leading to a repeat of the
Great Depression.
SUMMARY
■ The nominal interest rate tells you how many dollars you ■ The higher the leverage ratio, or the more illiquid the assets,
need to repay in the future in exchange for one dollar or the more liquid the liabilities, the higher the risk of a bank
today. run or a run on financial intermediaries.
■ The real interest rate tells you how many goods you need to ■ The IS-LM model must be extended to take into account the
repay in the future in exchange for one good today. difference between the nominal and the real interest rate,
■ The real interest rate is approximately equal to the nominal and the difference between the policy rate chosen by the

--- PDF Page 152 (offset 25) ---
151 ---

QUESTIONS AND PROBLEMS
QUICK CHECK
1. Using the information in this chapter, label each of the following
statements true, false, or uncertain. Explain briefly.
a. The nominal interest rate is measured in terms of goods;
the real interest rate is measured in terms of money.
b. As long as expected inflation remains roughly constant,
the movements in the real interest rate are roughly equal
to the movements in the nominal interest rate.
c. The nominal policy interest rate was at the zero lower
bound in the United States in 2019.
d. When expected inflation increases, the real rate of interest
falls.
e. All bonds have equal risk of default and thus pay equal
rates of interest.
f. The nominal policy interest rate is set by the central bank.
g. An increase in a bank’s leverage ratio tends to increase
both the expected profit of the bank and the risk of the

--- PDF Page 402 (offset 18) ---
401 ---

These two implications are important. In an open economy, an increase in domes-
tic demand has a smaller effect on output than in a closed economy, and an adverse
effect on the trade balance. Indeed, the more open the economy, the smaller the effect
on output and the larger the adverse effect on the trade balance. Take the Netherlands,
for example. As we saw in Chapter 17, the Netherlands’ ratio of exports to GDP is very
high. It is also true that the Netherlands’ ratio of imports to GDP is very high. When
domestic demand increases in the Netherlands, much of the increase in demand is likely
to result in an increase in the demand for foreign goods rather than domestic goods. The
effect of an increase in government spending is therefore likely to be a large increase in
the Netherlands’ trade deficit and only a small increase in its output, making domestic
demand expansion a rather unattractive policy for the Netherlands. Even for the United
States, which has a much lower import ratio, an increase in demand will be associated
with a worsening of the trade balance.
Increases in Foreign Demand
Consider now an increase in foreign output, that is, an increase in Y*. This could be due
to an increase in foreign government spending, G*—the policy change we just analyzed
but now taking place abroad. But we do not need to know where the increase in Y* comes
from to analyze its effects on the US economy.

--- PDF Page 403 (offset 19) ---
402 ---

Figure 18-4(a). The equilibrium is at point A, with output level Y. Let’s again assume
trade is balanced, so that in Figure 18-4(b) the net exports associated with Y equal
zero (Y = Y ).
TB
It will be useful below to refer to the line that shows the domestic demand for goods
C +I +G as a function of income. This line is drawn as DD. Recall from Figure 18-1 DD is the domestic demand
that DD is steeper than ZZ. The difference between ZZ and DD equals net exports, so that for goods. ZZ is the demand
if trade is balanced at point A, then ZZ and DD intersect at point A. b for domestic goods. The
difference between the two is
Now consider the effects of an increase in foreign output, ∆Y*. (For the moment,
equal to the trade deficit.
ignore the line DD; we need it only later.) Higher foreign output means higher foreign
demand, including higher foreign demand for US goods. So the direct effect of the
increase in foreign output is an increase in US exports by some amount, which we shall
denote by ∆X.
■ For a given level of output, this increase in exports leads to an increase in the
demand for US goods by ∆X, so the line showing the demand for domestic goods as a
function of output shifts up by ∆X, from ZZ to ZZ′.

--- PDF Page 404 (offset 20) ---
403 ---

The G20 and the 2009 Fiscal Stimulus
In November 2008, the leaders of the G20 countries gath- negative growth in 2009. The issue here is one of counter-
ered for an emergency meeting in Washington. The G20, a factuals. What would have happened in the absence of the
group of ministers of finance and central bank governors stimulus? Many believe that, in the absence of the fiscal
from 20 countries, including both the major advanced and stimulus, growth would have been even more negative, per-
the major emerging countries in the world, was created in haps catastrophically so. Counterfactuals are hard to prove
1999 but had not played a major role until the crisis. With or disprove, and thus the controversy is likely to go on.
mounting evidence that the crisis was going to be both deep (On the issue of counterfactuals and the difference between
and widespread, the group met to coordinate their responses economists and politicians, there is a nice quote from former
in terms of both macroeconomic and financial policies. US congressman Barney Frank:
On the macroeconomic front, it had become clear that
Not for the first time, as an elected official, I envy econo-
monetary policy would not be enough, and so the focus turned
mists. Economists have available to them, in an analytical
to fiscal policy. The decrease in output was going to lead to approach, the counterfactual. Economists can explain that a
a decrease in revenues and thus an increase in budget defi- given decision was the best one that could be made, because
cits. Dominique Strauss-Kahn, then the managing director of they can show what would have happened in the counter-
the International Monetary Fund, argued that further fiscal factual situation. They can contrast what happened to what

--- PDF Page 405 (offset 21) ---
404 ---

country might just wait for the other countries to increase their demand. This way, it gets
the best of both worlds—higher output and an improvement in its trade balance. But if all
the countries wait, nothing will happen, and the recession may last a long time.
Is there a way out? There is—at least in theory. If all countries coordinate their
macroeconomic policies so as to increase domestic demand simultaneously, each can
increase demand and output without increasing its trade deficit (vis-à-vis the others;
their combined trade deficit with respect to the rest of the world will still increase). The
reason is clear. The coordinated increase in demand leads to increases in both exports
and imports in each country. It is still true that domestic demand expansion leads to
larger imports; but this increase in imports is offset by the increase in exports, which
comes from the foreign demand expansions.
In practice, however, policy coordination is not so easy to achieve.
Some countries might have to do more than others and may not want to do so. Suppose
that only some countries are in recession. Countries that are not in a recession will be reluc-
tant to increase their own demand; but if they do not, the countries that expand will run a
trade deficit vis-à-vis countries that do not. Or suppose some countries are already running
a large budget deficit. These countries might not want to cut taxes or further increase spend-
ing as this would further increase their deficits. They will ask other countries to take on

--- PDF Page 406 (offset 22) ---
405 ---

Depreciation and the Trade Balance:
The Marshall–Lerner Condition
Return to the definition of net exports:
NX = X −IM ε
More concretely, if the dollar Replace X and IM by their expressions from equations (18.2) and (18.3):
depreciates vis-à-vis the yen
by 10%: c NX = X(Y*,ε)−IM(Y,ε) ε
US goods will be cheaper
in Japan, leading to a larger As the real exchange rate ε enters the right side of the equation in three places,
quantity of US exports to it is clear that the real depreciation affects the trade balance through three separate
Japan. channels:
Japanese goods will be
more expensive in the ■ Exports, X, increase. The real depreciation makes US goods relatively less expensive
United States, leading to a abroad. This leads to an increase in foreign demand for US goods—an increase in US
smaller quantity of imports
exports.
of Japanese goods to the
■ Imports, IM, decrease. The real depreciation makes foreign goods relatively more

--- PDF Page 407 (offset 23) ---
406 ---

goods because of the depreciation—are worse off. This mechanism is strongly felt in There is an alternative to
countries that go through a large depreciation. Governments trying to achieve a large rioting, namely, asking for
and obtaining an increase in
depreciation often find themselves with strikes and riots in the streets as people react
wages. But if wages increase,
to the much higher prices of imported goods. This was the case in Mexico, for example,
the prices of domestic goods
where the large depreciation of the peso in 1994–1995—from 29 cents per peso will increase as well, leading
in November 1994 to 17 cents per peso in May 1995—led to a large decline in workers’ to a smaller real depreciation.
living standards and to social unrest. b To discuss this mechanism,
we need to look at the supply
side in more detail than we
Combining Exchange Rate and Fiscal Policies
have done so far. We return to
the dynamics of depreciation,
Suppose output is at its natural level but the economy is running a large trade deficit. The
wage, and price movements
government would like to reduce the trade deficit while leaving output unchanged so as

--- PDF Page 408 (offset 24) ---
407 ---

The Disappearance of the Current Account Deficit
in Greece: Good News or Bad News?
Starting in the early 2000s, several euro periphery countries forcing it to reduce borrowing and thus to reduce its current
ran larger and larger current account deficits. Particularly account deficit. But by 2018, the current account deficit was
striking was the increase in Greece’s current account defi- less than 1% of GDP.
cit. As shown in Figure 1, the current account went from It was an impressive turnaround. Was it unambiguously
an already large deficit of 6% of GDP in 2000 to more good news? Not necessarily. There are two ways a current
than 15% in 2008. When the Great Financial Crisis started, account may improve. The first is that the country becomes
Greece found it increasingly difficult to borrow abroad, more competitive: The real exchange rate decreases, exports
386 The Open Economy Extensions
SUCOF
Table 18-1 Exchange Rate and Fiscal Policy
Combinations
Initial Conditions Trade Surplus Trade Deficit
Low output ε??GG↑ ε↓GG??
High output ε↑GG?? ε??GG↓
If the government wants to eliminate the trade deficit without changing output, it must
do two things:

--- PDF Page 409 (offset 25) ---
408 ---

Figure 1
2
The Evolution of the Greek
0
Current Account Deficit from
22 2000 to 2018
24 Source: IMF Managing Director
Dominique Strauss-Kahn Calls
26 G-20 Action Plan Significant Step
toward Stronger International
28 Cooperation, Press Release No.
08/286, November 15, 2008.
210
212
214
216
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1