--- PDF 516 ---
515 ---

The Interest Rate Rule
Inflation is not under the direct control of the central bank; the policy rate is. Thus, the ques-
tion that arises is how to set the policy rate to achieve the target rate of inflation. The answer
is a simple one: When inflation is higher than the target, increase the policy rate to decrease
demand and the pressure on prices; when it is below the target rate of inflation, decrease the
policy rate. With this principle in mind, in the 1990s, John Taylor, at Stanford University,
suggested the following rule for the policy rate, a rule now known as the Taylor rule:
■ Let π be the rate of inflation and π be the target rate of inflation.
t
■ Let i be the policy rate, that is, the nominal interest rate controlled by the central bank,
t
and let i be the target nominal interest rate—the nominal interest rate associated with
For a refresher, go back to c the neutral rate of interest, r , and the target rate of inflation, π, so i = r +π.
n n
Chapter 9, Section 9-1. ■ Let u be the unemployment rate and u be the natural unemployment rate.
t n
Think of the central bank as choosing the nominal interest rate, i. (Recall from
Chapter 4 that through open market operations and ignoring the liquidity trap, the cen-
tral bank can achieve any short-term nominal interest rate that it wants.) Then, Taylor
argued, the central bank should use the following rule:
i = i +a(π −π)−b(u −u )
t t t n
where a and b are positive coefficients chosen by the central bank.
Let’s look at what the rule says:
■ If inflation is equal to target inflation (π = π) and the unemployment rate is equal
t
to the natural rate of unemployment (u = u ), then the central bank should set
t n
the nominal interest rate, i , equal to its target value, i. This way, the economy can
t
stay on the same path, with inflation equal to the target inflation rate and unem-
ployment equal to the natural rate of unemployment.
■ If inflation is higher than the target (π > π), the central bank should increase the
t
nominal interest rate, i , above i. This higher interest rate will lead to an increase in
t
unemployment, and this increase in unemployment will in turn lead to a decrease in
inflation. The coefficient a should therefore reflect how much the central bank cares
about inflation. The higher a, the more the central bank will increase the interest rate
Some economists argue
in response to inflation, the more the economy will slow down, the more unemploy-
that US inflation increased
ment will increase, and the faster inflation will return to the target inflation rate.
in the 1970s because the
Fed increased the nominal ■ In any case, as Taylor pointed out, a should be larger than one. Why? Because what
interest rate less than matters for spending is the real interest rate, not the nominal interest rate. When
one-for-one with inflation. inflation increases, the central bank, if it wants to decrease spending and output,
The result, they argue, was
must increase the real interest rate